Journal of Library Services and Technologies , 4(2), 2022 
ISSN: 2616 -1354 (Print)  2636 -7424 (Online) Available online at credencepressltd.com  
10.47524/jlst.v4i2.2  
 
Design and implementation of an online bookstore : The case  of University of 
Ilorin  (UNILORIN ) Bookshop  
 
Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye  
Department of Library and Informatio n Science, University of Ilorin, Nigeria  
E-mail:  getbukkyajayi@gmail.com  
 
Mufutau Ayobami Asiru  
Principal Librarian  
Federal Polytechnic, Ado -Ekiti  
E-mail: ayobamimufu@gmail.com  
 
Taiye Emmanuel  Ogunlade  
 E-mail: ogunlade.emma@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract  
This study  aimed at developing an online platform where books and other  items are made available online for 
convenience, faster way of checking product details and making purchase online  at University of Ilorin  
(UNILORIN ) Bookshop . This addressed the problem of searching for availability and comparing prices of textbooks 
phys ically which can be exhausting and time consuming in one’s search for information. The research methodology 
adopted the use of questionnaire and observation to determine bookshop users’ needs of an online bookstore. The 
results showed that 80% of the respo ndents indicated interest in buying books online. Observation was used to 
gather information about the existing system’s operations particularly on price update of books and collection of 
new books. The inadequacies of the existing system were improved on by the proposed system. The new system 
made use of a markup language HTML, PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor; a server -side scripting language) as the main 
code for the program, CSS framework Bootstrap, CSS (Cascading Style Sheet) MySQL as the database for the 
system.  This project has been able to browse through product categories, use the search option, check product 
description and price, add to cart and also increase the number of Item, select the delivery method and finally, make 
payment. It was recommended that further work be done using another web stack such as Nodejs, Mongodb, Ruby 
on Rails or design a mobile app using hybrid technology.  
 
Keywords : Design, implementation, online, bookstore, produc t 
 
Introduction  
Electronic commerce commonly known as 
e-Commerce which is a subset of e -Business 
consists of buying and selling of products or 
services over electroni c systems such as the 
internet and other computer networks. E -
commerce is the use of the Internet for 
marketing, identification, payment and 
delivery of goods and services. Through the 
e-commerce technology, the Internet has 
revolutionized the mode of busi ness 
transactions by providing consumers with 
the ability to bank, invest, purchase, 
distribute, communicate, explore, and 
research from virtually anywhere, anytime where there is Interne t access  Anup ( as cited  
in Ayo 2011 ). 
A user who access es the website is 
able to select the desired product that he/she 
wants to buy which is added to their c art 
(list of intended online purchases a customer 
want(s) to acquire, after which the customer 
proceed s to fill a billing address, shipping 
address, a deli very option and payment 
information such as credit card details.  
Despite the convenience of online 
shopping, not everyone chooses to purchase 
items and services online. Some people like 
the idea of physically going to a store and 
experiencing the shopping process. They 
like to touch the merchandise, try on 
1Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 clothing, and be around other people. Online 
shopping doesn't permit shoppers to touch 
products or have any social interaction. It 
also doesn't allow them to take the 
merchandise home the same day they bu y it.  
Online shopping also eliminates the 
catchy, yet irritating music, as well as the 
hundreds, if not thousands, of other like -
minded individuals who seem to have 
decided to shop on the same day.  Online 
shopping allows you to browse through 
endless poss ibilities, and even offers 
merchandise that's unavailable in stores. If 
you're searching for a niche product that 
may not be distributed locally, you're sure to 
find what you're looking for on the internet. 
What's even more useful is the ability to 
compare  items, similar or not, online. You 
can search through multiple stores at the 
same time, comparing material quality, sizes 
and pricing simultaneously.  
Existence of online platforms to 
facilitate on campus book selling has 
increased throughout the years as the rise of 
agile information sharing and retrieval 
become critical factor in processes that 
occurs within campus proxy. Information 
dissemination which occurs traditionally 
have resulted in knowledge obsolescence as 
in today’s world knowledge is rapidly 
changing as new innovation comes in.  Over 
the years, many Universities have embraced 
the adoption of having an online bookstore, 
some of the Universities Are University of 
Oregon, University of Washington, 
University of Colorado, University of 
California Lo s Angeles and many others.  
In order to successfully nurture 
creativity and innovativeness among its 
students, Universities must strive to focus on  
aspect s which relate  to providing quality 
academic learning, which starts from 
dissemination and utilization of literature. 
Examples of online bookstore in Nigeria are Lantern books, iQrabooks, and sunshine 
bookseller  
 
Statement of  the problem  
In an academic e nvironment, pivotal to 
learning are books and academic resour ces 
that aid the  students  to attain their academic 
goals  and academic staff  to facilitate 
teaching and research.  It becomes expedient 
that there should be access to current and 
relevant academic  books and learning 
materials to keep abreast with the tr ends in 
the various discipline s. The responsibility to 
purchase these books  at the bookstores  rests 
on both the staff and students . To make 
purchase, they must check for its 
availability,  ask for the price , and compare 
prices  in order to make an informed 
decision . Unfortunately, some e nd up 
walking from a long distance to the 
bookstore to find out that the item they wish 
to buy is not available, or the price is more 
than the price assumed  by the potential 
buyer, some spend more time i n searching 
for a book. All these lead to  physical stress,  
which can be time consuming  thereby  
leading to  reduce d productivity .  
In order to ameliorate  the problem s 
highlighted above, it becomes pertinent  to 
have an online platform where a client can 
search for, compare products , check the 
price, add to ca rt and fill the billing and 
payment addresses and card details to 
purchase items listed in their cart s. 
 
Objective s of the study  
The main objective of this study is to design 
a responsive and efficient web applica tion 
that will transform UNILORIN  Bookstore 
from its traditional way of purchasing books 
to using an online platform which operates 
electronically, through the design and 
implementation of an online bookstore.  
The specific objectives are to : 
2Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 1. design an electronic commerce 
system , 
2. develop th is system using server 
side programming language , and  
3. implement a payment system and 
create a method of delivery 
option.  
 
Significance of the study  
This system will assist patron s of the 
bookstore to access books and other items 
online in an effective manner. This project 
aims to solve problems associated to 
traditional way of purchasing books from 
the bookstore. The system gives 
convenience, quick access, and easy access 
to availa ble items in the bookstore.  
 
Scope and limitation of the study  
This research work is centred on developing 
a system that provides an effective and 
efficient way of buying books and other 
academic  material s in UNILORIN  
Bookstore. This study is limited to 
UNILORIN  Bookstore , University of Ilorin . 
 
Literature review  
The origin of online retailing began in 1995 
with the launch of eBay and Amazo n. EBay 
was started in the 1995 by Pierre Omidyar as 
an online auction. It expanded to involve an 
online retai l center where goods were 
purchased.  Jeff Bezos established Amazon, 
which specia lized itself in book sales. 
Amazon's website shows the company 
generated more than $230 billion in revenue 
in 2018 while posting more than $10 billion 
in profit or net income. Other e -retailers that 
operate exclusively online and compete with 
Amazon include Overstock.com and 
JD.com . Today , internet stands out to be the 
biggest medium for selling and buying.  
Online retail has been one of the 
most upcoming retail sales in the genre of 
book sales. In  the last decade,  bookstores have experienced a dramatic decline in their 
volume of sales, with the online retail 
marketing having an upsurge. The vast 
majo rity of the online retail websites are 
middlemen between the actual publisher s 
and the consumer, with commissions being 
paid on each product sold.  Consumers can 
compare the pric e, quality and availability of 
items from across the globe (Limayem et al., 
2000). The power  to displace the traditional 
markets lies in the ability to satisfy its 
consumers’ needs better than those 
traditional business approaches and provide 
consumers with lower prices, wider 
selections, better choices, superior services, 
or more convenience.  Vassos (as cited in  
Yang, Zielinski &  Cheng, 2009 ). 
Chevalier and Goolsbee (2003) 
examine d the college textbook market to 
determine whether its consumers are 
forward -looking, where by a forward -looking 
consumer is defined as a person who 
purchases  durable goods  today  with the 
future in mind .  
According to Muzumdar  (2012), 
Low price, price flexibility and convenience 
stands out to be the biggest advantage online 
medium has compared to on & off campus 
bookstore. Online medium shows more 
interaction between buyer and seller, and 
also more flexibility in pricing policy.  
The advantage  of online  price 
comparison is important as it enables and 
guarantees purchase at the lowest price 
possible after comparison with different 
sellers  at specific time frames in the online 
market . In contrast to the traditional 
bookstore,  the prices are fi xed and it is 
difficult to move  between bookstores to 
compare prices of books before making a 
decision.  
In comparison to the traditional 
markets, books are almost always available 
in the online markets and globally 
networked i nformation S ystems can reduce 
3Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 the search and transaction costs for buyers 
and sellers to locate and trade and can 
thereby facilitate the creation of technology -
mediated electronic exchanges.  This 
corroborates the findings from Chen et al 
(2012) which states that print  textbooks in 
colleges are so expensive that the prices of 
two textbooks would be equal to an e-book -
reader. Hence, with the super development 
of technology, electronic devices’ prices are 
decreasing compared to a few years ago.  
According to Malone , Yates and 
Benjamin (1987 ), comparing on and off 
campus bookstore  shows  that an online retail 
doesn’t require an inventory to stock the 
sales, as every individual retailer, seller can 
sell his product through his individual 
inventory. Having multiple sellers helps 
online retail websites to keep up with the 
availability of the  book throughout the year. 
One of the biggest benefits of online 
shopping is that you can buy almost 
anything you could imagine without ever 
leaving your house. Online stores are open 
24 hours a day and are accessible from any 
location  with an Internet con nection.  In 
general, online stores are able to carry more 
selection than traditional brick -and-mortar 
stores. Because online stores don’t need to 
attractively display their items on shelves, 
they can keep a larger amount of inventory 
on hand. They also mig ht only have small 
amounts of each item, since they don’t need 
to display them, and can order more from 
their supplier as needed.  Also, online shops 
tend to provide more information about 
items for sale than you would get in a 
physical store . Product descr iptions most 
often include a description from the 
manufacturer, another description from the 
vendor, specific technical and size details, 
reviews from professional magazines and 
journals, and  reviews from people who have 
bought the product. Online book sto res often 
will have excerpts of the books (usually the first chapter) for you to read. Having all this 
information available when you are 
considering a purchase makes you a more 
informed consumer without having to 
perform extra research yourself.   
The abil ity to sell fr om anywhere by  
the traditional on -campus and off -campus 
market is important and exchange of money 
can also be done online for any item 
purchased. One generally ha s several 
options of payment methods when 
purchasing items online. The most common 
way to pay online is with a credit card; one 
almost never want s to pay for items online 
with cash or cash -like methods (e.g., debit 
cards, money orders, and personal  cheque s). 
Credit cards offer some additional 
protections from fraud, including zero -
liability policies ( one should not be held 
responsible for purchases made with one’s  
stolen card) and credit pr otector services 
alert one to fishy activity. Importantly, credit 
cards are not directly linked to bank 
account s, so no m oney will be withdrawn 
from  account until monthly bill s are paid . 
This accounts to a large extent for  the 
success of  on cam pus and off campus 
bookstores . To counter the se problems, 
Amazon and eBay in last five years have 
started using direct checkout methods as 
Alternative to sign up accounts, where direct 
check out method doesn’t require a person 
to feed in and save their account and credit 
card information (Yang, Zielinski and 
Chen g, 2009). Also third party online 
payment and money transfer websites like 
PayPal act as third party firms for money 
transfers. PayPal started in 1998 and 
currently acquired by eBay runs as the most 
trusted third party money transfer service 
around the glo be. All eBay purchases, for 
example, are conducted via P ayPal . PayPal 
and other payment websites will never ask 
for your credit card number or other 
personal information by e -mail.  
4Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 In summary,  online retail sales are 
preferred by th e people who are more 
concerned about price difference in goods . 
Price is perceived to be one of the factors 
that is  highly influential between both seller 
and consumer. Consumers like to exploit  
low price s, while  sellers prefer  to hav e price  
flexibility. Price comparison seem s to be the 
most beneficial tool that the online retaili ng 
website has over other media . For consumer 
search engines, the function of “ add to cart ” 
and “check out as guest” are part of the  
advantages, but for sellers it is direct 
trans action with consumer, online money 
transfers, bundling products.  
Nigeria is the fastest growing 
telecommunication country in Africa (Ayo 
et al., 2007). According to the Nigerian 
Communications Commission  website , 
internet users  marginally increased to 
115,931,255 in March, 2019  ranking Nigeria 
at the top in the list of African countries 
with the highest number of internet users . 
Compared to January 2018, there has been a 
4 million increase in the number of internet 
users.  Over 1 12 million Nigerians had 
access to the internet in 2018, representing 
56% of the population . This growth 
percentage represents the increase in the 
number of internet users between the years 
2000 and 2019 . In 2009, the figure went 
above double as 23,982,000  million people 
used Internet in Nigeria. By June 2010, the 
number of internet users in Nigeria has 
grown to 43,982,200 that is 29.5% of the 
country’s population. The increasing users 
of internet in Nigeria from 0.1% in 2000 to 
29.5% of its population in J une 2010, 
revealed that the use of internet in the 
country is growing at a sporadic rate and 
still has the potential to grow higher. 
Nigeria’s e -commerce market was  recently 
valued at 225 billion Naira due to the 25% 
in e-commerce growth. The reason for this 
growth is not far -fetched as Nigeria is the most populous  nation in Africa. Despite the 
growth of internet users in Nigeria, much 
research work has not been done in 
accessing the B2C e -commerce activity. 
Presently, many online shopping sites are 
thriving in Nigeria,  constantly thinking of 
how to satisfy customers by designing 
products aimed at  servicing thousands of 
searchers every week. Some of them are:  
Jumia.com .ng, Konga.com.ng, Yudala.  
com.ng, Kaymu.com.ng www.  
234world.com, Xtaples. net, www.book  
sng.com, www.orderbay.com . Some of these 
sites make  the transaction process very user -
friendly which tends to make buyers prefer 
the online  market. A site like 234world.com 
allows buyer to pay to a designated bank 
account after making online purchases. The 
items purchased are then shipped to the 
buyer at the speed of light. Soft Pay allows 
individua l to receive money online and 
thereafter use it to pay for purchases made. 
It even helps online shopping sites to collect 
payment for purchases made.  
Considering all these, it is expected 
that the number of people engaging in e -
commerce activity will incre ase. E -
commerce has however not been widely 
tapped into  in Nigeria . Many Nigerians still 
treat its benefits with deep skepticism  due to 
lack of trust . They do not believe that e -
commerce transactions could be successfully 
conducte d. In light of the difficu lties facing 
the e -commerce sector in Nigeria, online 
vendors are devising techniques to 
encourage and increase customers’ 
confidence in online shopping. Popular 
online vendors like Jumia and Konga have 
introduced the pay on delivery option where 
customers  make their orders online without 
having to pay online; payments are made 
when the customer receives their goods. 
This has gone a long way with addressing 
the trust and security issues associated with 
buying products online (Gabriel et al 2016).  
5Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
  
Method s 
System development lifecycle  
System development methodology is a 
standard set of steps used by organization to 
develop and support their information 
system, this often follows a lifecycle, the 
system development life cycle is a common 
methodology for syste ms development in 
many organizations, it marks the steps or 
phase in information system. Systems 
development methodology is a standard 
process followed in an organization to 
conduct all the steps necessary to analyze, 
design, implement, and maintain 
inform ation systems.  
System development lifecycle SDLC 
is divided into four stages namely Planning, 
Analysis, Design, Implementation and 
Operation  
System planning  is the first phase in 
the SDLC it has two primary activities 
which are; firstly, identify the need for a 
new system or enhanced system secondly; to 
investigate system and determine the 
proposed system’s scope.  
The second phase of the systems 
development life cycle is systems analysis.  
During this phase, the analyst thoroughly 
studies the organization’s current system 
procedures and the information systems 
used to perform tasks such as general ledger, 
shipping, order entry, machine scheduling, 
and payroll. Analysis has several sub -phases. The first sub -phase involves 
determining the requirements of the sy stem 
to determine what the users want from a 
proposed system. it involves a careful study 
of any current systems, manual and 
computerized, that might be replaced or 
enhanced.  
 
Questionnaire  
Copies of q uestionnaire were administered 
randomly to students who came into the 
bookstore, questionnaire was used to get 
information about the need for an online 
bookstore. It contained  both open ended and 
close ended questions  
This method was used because  
questionn aire: 
1.  Can be analyzed more 'scientifically' 
and objectively than other forms of 
research  
2. It gives the respondent freedom to 
express their view by using open 
ended question  
3. A questionnaire is concise only 
relevant questions are asked.  
4. Questionnaire is  not subject to 
influence decision of the respondent.  
Fifty -seven (50 ) questionnaire s were 
administered to patron/student.  
Result of the questionnaire are 
represented in charts below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1:  Gender, interest and mode of payment o nline  
 
Observation  
For the purpose of observation, in order to 
understand how  the traditional system 
works, the researcher  went to the bookstore 
on several occasion to carefully watch and 
record the way operations are being carried 
out. This technique involved gathering of 
information on how the existing system 
running of operations in the bookstore, 
particularly about the up date on price of 
books and collection of new books. It is a very tedious and time consuming process 
which has its merits such as:  
1. It gives room for proper details 
which are not recorded on document 
or gotten through the questionnaire.  
2. It gives more detaile d to know how 
user behaves when navigating 
through the books in the bookstore.  
3. It also give s room  to know the 
categories of books in the bookstore 
and the rise of some books.  
7Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
  
System analysis  
During this phase, the analyst thoroughly 
studies the organizat ion’s current system 
procedures and the information systems 
used to perform tasks such as general ledger, 
shipping, order entry, machine scheduling, 
and payroll. Analysis has several sub -
phases. The first sub -phase involves 
determining the requirements of the system 
to determine what the user s want from a 
proposed system. I t involves a careful study 
of any current systems, manual and 
computerized, that might be replaced or 
enhanced.  
 
Description of the existing system  
The current system  in use  by UNILORIN  
Bookstore is completely manually based. 
The attendant at the bookstore takes new 
product, record s it, and write s the price on it 
before placing it on the shelves. Also when a 
patron of the bookstore purchases the 
product, the attendant is responsible for 
taking record of the price, quantity, and 
issuing of receipts and also recoding it on 
the book set aside for that purpose. 
Overtime , these records are piled up and 
also they are prone to physical hazard that 
can r esult to loss of data and information . 
 
Problems of the existing system  
The following are some of the problem s 
faced with the existing system.  
 The system does not have any form of 
backup in case of fire outbreak or any 
other disasters.  
 It is prone to errors  due to manual 
method of handling information 
which  are noticed in processed 
information.  
 It becomes a problem when many 
buyers come in to get product thereby 
leading to long queue in the bookstore  
 This system is not available 24/7.   This system does not gi ve room for 
proper comparison of items in the 
bookstore.  
 It is time consuming  as a user will 
need to search through the shelves 
before finding the item or books 
desired.  
 
Improvement of the proposed system over 
the existing system  
The proposed system is concentrated on 
easing the management of records of items 
and other material by developing a 
bookstore in an online environment. The 
system would manage all important record 
about items, book and authors with the use 
of information technology tools. The 
creation of a web based application which 
can be accessed from anywhere in world in 
digital format of all existing records of the 
books and items in the bookstore. The 
system would make product categories, 
price authors details, and payment 
processing online  available.  
 Reducing the complexity of the 
system and maintain large 
information.  
 Record will be efficiently maintained 
through database management 
system.  
 Fast retrieval of documents through 
search using author, title of books.  
 Convenience in making compa rison 
between products  
 Student can search for product 24/7  
 Security of the web application will 
be ensured by putting SSL (Secured 
Socket Layer) and HTTPS in place  
 The system provides easy search for 
records.  
 Ability to perform adhoc  query to the 
database by the administartor.  
 There will be more data integrity.  
8Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
  It eliminates the fear of people 
reporting criminal or hoodlums in 
their communities.  
 Ability to make payment and print 
receipts online  
 It eliminates queuing ad helps make 
better decision  
 
System architecture and design  
unified modelling  language (UML ) 
This is a graphical language for 
visualizing, specifying and 
constructing the artifact of a 
software -intensive system. It offers a 
standard way to write standard 
system blueprints, including 
conceptual things such as business 
processes and system functions  as 
well as concrete things such as 
programming language statement, database schemas and reusable 
software components . 
 
Architecture of the proposed s ystem  
The architecture supports the exist ing 
infrastructure re quirement and provides 
specific recommendation for hardware, 
software and network structure  based on the 
existing and projected user needs. The 
application requirements, data resources and 
people within an organization are all 
important in determining the optimum 
hardware solution. This is represented with 
three tier architecture that comprises of the 
User interface, Process management and 
Database Management System (DBMS). 
This gives a clear view of what the 
components of the system, the services they 
provide and the way these services 
communicate to bring about proper system 
functionality.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                Figu re 2: The architecture of  the proposed system  
9Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 Use Case  
Use case is a list of step for defining 
interaction between a role and the system 
from the user perspective in the way they 
understand. Use cases are important 
requirement techniques that have been 
widely used in modern software 
engineering. A use case def ines the interactions between external actors and the 
system under consideration to accomplish a 
goal and the actor can a person or an 
organization. It is valuable for system 
developers; it is an effective technique for 
gathering systems from user point of  view.  
Use cases focus on the behavior of the 
system from external point of view.
  
  
 Figure 3 : User use case diagram of the proposed system  
10Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
   
Figure 4 : Administrators use case diagram of the proposed system  
 
Flow c hart 
This is a diagram or graphic that represents a 
process or algorithm. The steps are 
represented by a series of boxes or other specialized symbols with the description of 
each process and step connected with 
arrows . 
Administrator  
11Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
   
Figure 5 :  The flowchart online shopping  
 
Justification o f the development t ools 
These tools adopted for the designing of this 
system were used because of how well they integrate with each other and proven for the 
development of similar systems.  
  
12Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 Hypertext mark -up language 5 (HTML5)  
HTML is a standard for creating website 
pages with  elements  consisting 
of tags enclosed in  angle brackets  such as 
<html>. HTML5 is a revision of the 
traditional HTML 4.01 and XHTML. 
HTML5 is a markup language used for the 
structure and presentation of World Wide  
Web contents and  is based on tags that 
markup text -based documents . HTML5 was 
developed to solve compatibility problems 
that affect the current standard HTML 
4.01style syntax some include proprietary 
plugin and  APIs  (when a web page 
developed in one browser may not be able to 
load in another browser). The major 
advantage of HTML5 is the ability to 
support multimedia on mobile devices. 
HTML5 also included some new features 
which can really change the way users 
interact with documents including:  
 New  parsing  rules for enhanced 
flexibility  
 New  attribute s 
 Elimination of outmoded or redundant 
attributes  
 Drag and drop capabilities from one 
HTML5 document to another  
 
Cascading style sheet  
Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) is used to 
contro l formatting of element within the 
layout of website pages and it can be created 
within a HTML or within an external style 
sheet. CSS only functions with the existence 
of an html code. They can be used to define 
text style, color and size. CSS is used for 
creating styles that can be used repeatedly in 
a web page which takes less typing than the 
equivalent formatting with tags, thus saving 
you kilobytes of disk space. Apart from 
styling which CSS is generally known to be 
used for; the structure of applicatio ns can be 
built using CSS, meaning the application would be table less. This attribute increases  
its demand in today’s web de signing.  
Hypertext pre-processor (PHP)  
PHP is a scripting language that is widely 
used by a lot of developers. PHP supports 
MySQL database and a variety of other 
database such as Sybase, Oracle and 
PostgreSQL. This flexible support is useful 
if you ever need to move your application to 
differen t database (Bacon, 2007). PHP is 
well optimized to with a fast response time 
on web applications. This can have  a large 
base of core classes which can be used to 
build Graphical User Interface (GUI). PHP 
has the advantage of been scalable and a 
static lang uage.  
 
MySQL (Structured Query Language)  
This is an open source and a comprehensive 
relational database server. It been used to 
develop web software applications. It 
supports large database with up to 50 
million rows, it is fast and can run on 
different op erating systems. MySQL offers 
exceptional security features that ensure 
absolute data protection. In terms of 
database authentication and mechanism for 
ensuring only authorized to have access to 
the database.  
 
Java script  
JavaScript is an interpreted language with a 
C programming language like syntax. It is 
embedded directly into HTML page to make 
them responsive. JavaScript is a lightweight 
scripting language which make web page to 
be interactive. They are used to add more  
functionality, validate forms, create cookies 
and detect browsers . 
 
Database Management System  
Database management system is a software 
system that uses a standard method for 
cataloging, retrieving and running queries on 
data. The DBMS manages incoming data, 
13Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 organizes data and provide ways for data to 
be modified or extracted by user or other 
progra ms (Tech Terms, 2014) other to modify. DMBS stores data in such a way 
that is a lot easier to retrieve, manipulate and 
help in structure information.
 
 
Figure 6: Screenshot of database table  
 
Bootstrap f ramework  
Bootstrap  is a free and open -source 
collection of tools for creating websites and 
web applications. It contains HTML - and 
CSS-based design templates for typography, 
forms, buttons, navigation and other 
interface components, as well as optional 
JavaScript extensions. It uses 12 gr id layout 
for it responsive design.  
 
System implementation, testing and 
evaluation  
Presentation of the system interface  
This shows the system interface of the 
design environment of each window in the   
E-Police Management system.  This includes 
some of the user page, product, categories 
and Administrative page.  
 
Homepage  
This is the first page which loads when the 
application is started, it contain s a slider 
with three slides at the center, categories 
section, navigation menu such  as checkout 
page, and product list beneath the slider.  
14Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
  
Figure 7: Homepage.  
  
15Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 Administrator login page  
This is the page which grants the admin 
authorization to admin page where the admin can add product, modify product 
details, oversee reports, orders and delete 
product.  
 
Figure 8: Admin login page.  
 
Report page   
This is a page on the administrator page 
where report about order can be seen, details   
such as the product ID, product price, order 
ID, product title, and product quantity.  
 
Figure 9: Report page  
 
Order  page 
The order menu show case orders that have 
been completed, it show the amount,   
transaction, ID, currency and status of the 
order.  
16Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
  
Fig 10: Order page  
 
View p roduct  
This page showcase the product and the 
corresponding description, such as the ID,   
Title category, price and quantity of the 
product with an option to delete a product.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Add p roduct page  
 This page enables the admin to input new 
record of a product the details that will be 
supplied are  The product title, description, author, and 
price.  
Figure 11: Add product page.  
 
17Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 Categories page  Categories page shows different categories 
of product in the administrative area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12: Categories  
 
Users in a dmin  
Users page the name and other details of 
registered user such as the user email, 
username and user password.
 
Figure 13: Users  
 
Shop page  
This page showcase different types of 
product uploaded irrespective of the   
category, it also shows  the search button 
which can be used to search for product.  
18Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
  
Figure 14: Shop page  
 
Checkout p age is a page that shows the 
product, price, quantity and cumulative price of product based on   quantity of the item 
selected.it also the include s the subtotal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15: Check out page  
 
Summary  
The main aim of  the development of this 
project was to transform  UNILORIN  
bookstore  system  from its traditional way of 
purchasing books to using an online 
platform which operates electronically,   
 
through  the design and implementation of an 
online bookstore.  
In achieving the necessary objectives 
for developing the new system, the existing 
system was studied, analyzed and corrected 
19Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 to provide an efficiency and reliability 
system.  
 The main objective of the  new 
system is to digitize all existing records of 
books kept by UNILORIN  Bookstore and 
enabling  some manual processes of the 
existing system to be done electronically. 
These processes include creating product 
categories, adding a new user admin, adding 
new products, modification of existing 
product details, getting order and report 
details.  
 
Conclusion  
This project has been able to fulfil its 
objective by developing an online bookstore 
using UNILORIN  bookstore as the case 
study, it will serve the users and also ease 
the way they buy product online.  It will 
facilitate 24/7 service to access the platform 
online and also provide a way of making 
comparison and selection of delivery 
method.  
The system will  be effective if it is 
used for the purpose it was meant for and 
other purpose s that it can serve such as the 
sales of other learning material s available at 
the book shop. Also, the awareness of this 
platform should be made known to student s 
and staff of the university on the 
University’s website , as it will help them get 
help in terms of how they can acquire 
academic materials and stationery materials 
which can help them in study or research 
purpose.  
In addition to this, anyone who 
desires  to work further on the same project 
can use another web stack such as Nodejs, 
Mongodb or Ruby on Rails or design a 
mobile app using hybrid technology.  
 
References  
Ayo, C. K., Ekong O. U ., Fatudimu, I.T., & 
Adebiyi , A. A. (2007 ). M-Commerce 
Implementation in Nigeria: Trends and Issues. Journal of Internet 
Banking and Commerce ,12 (2).  
Ayo, C. K. (2011); Business -to-Consumer 
E-commerce in Nigeria: Prospect 
and Challenges;  African Journal of 
Business Management , 5(13), 5109 -
5117.  
Chen, Y. , Fan, S., & He, Z. (2012). 
Exploratory research: The effects of 
electronic books on college students. 
Johnson & Wales University, 
Providence, RI.  
Chevalier, J., & Goolsbee, A. (2003). 
Measuring prices and price 
competition online:Amazon.com and 
BarnesandNoble.com. Quantitative 
Marketing and Economics , 1(6), 
203–222. 
Gabriel, J.M.O., Ogbuiwe, T.O., & Ahiauzu, 
L. (2016). Online shopping systems 
in Nigeria: Evolution, trend and 
prospects. Asian Research Journal of 
Arts & Social Sciences , 1(4), 182-
276. 
Limayem, M., Khalifa, M. & Frini, A. 
(2000). What makes consumers buy 
from the internet? A longitudinal 
study of online shopping. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems. Man and 
Cybernetics – Part A: Systems and 
Humans , 30(4), 421 –432. 
Malone, T., JoAnne, Y., & Benjamin, R. 
(1987). Electronic markets and 
electronic hierarchies. 
Communications of the ACM,  30(6), 
484-497. 
Muzumdar, P. ( 2012) . Online Bookstore -A 
trend in textbook sales management 
for services marketing. Journal of 
Management and Marketing 
Research . The University of Texas at 
Arlington.  
Yang. J., Zielinski, J ., & Cheng, L. (2009). 
Purchasing college textbook from E - 
bookstore - An empirical study. 
20Olubukola Oluyemisi Ajiboye and Ogunlade Taiye Emmanuel: Design and implementation of an 
online bookstore: The case of University of Ilorin Bookshop  
 
 
Journal of Library Services and  Technologies, Volume 4 Number 2 , 2022  
 
 International Journal Management 
in Education , 3(2),162- 178. 
 
 
 
21